Nanyx
===

Nanyx's goals are as follows:

* To be at least reasonably familiar to a user of popular languages such as Python or TypeScript, even if some things are a little different
* To have minimal syntax, with a focus on readability
* To be strongly-typed, but with type inference so that the user doesn't have to write types all the time
* To be gradually-typed, meaning that a Nanyx program will still run even if it has type errors
* To be as powerful as possible with as few features as possible
* To be as consistent as possible, i.e. no special cases or exceptions
* To be as expressive and productive as possible with as few features as possible. "Min-gen" principal
* To "Inform but don't block", meaning that the compiler will not stop you from running code that has type or name errors, but it will warn you about them

We can see this in how Nanyx handles errors. If a user wishes to return an error from a function they simply return an error value. Thanks to the fact that Nanyx supports union types we know that the function's caller must handle this value (or return it themselves).

# To be as productive as possible

This means a focus on the developer experience, with high-quality editor support, good error messages, and a fast compiler.


--  It's also possible to create a typed definition that is not a function, but a value.
--  This is equivalent to an `object` definition from Scala or Kotlin
def Config = ( 
  host = "https://nyx-lang.org"
  port = 80
)

--  If the above was written as `def config` then it would have the type `(host: string, port: int)`
--  but, thanks to the uppercase starting character, it also generates a type `Config` with the same
--  so that `def Config` has the type `Config`.




--  Existential types
type DataFlow = (
  type LocalState
  next: LocalState -> ()
  getCurrentDataFlowDiagnostics: list(string)
)

type Collection = (
  type Item
  mut count: int
  apply: (index: Int) -> Item
  append: (item: Item) -> ()
)

def UppercaseStringsCollection() ->
  def container = MList(): _(string)

  ( type Item = string
    mut count = 0
    def apply(index) -> container(index)
    def append(item) -> container.append(item.toUpperCase())
  )

def myDataFlow = 
  mut state = 0

  DataFlow(
    type LocalState = int
    next = { state += 1 }
    getCurrentDataFlowDiagnostics = { ["State is {state}"] }
  )


--  --	Generics -- 

--	What happens if there are no type annotations and the compiler doesn't have any uses with which
--	to guess the type? E.g.
def f = { x -> x }

--	This function takes in an object and then just returns it. What type is `a`? Any? No. If the compiler
--	can't infer the type of the argument it will try to make your function generic.
--	So, rewriting the above function in full ->

def f
  : α -> α
  = { x -> x }		--	This way the function is still strongly-typed but will work on any type

--  Note that there isn't a syntax for introducing a type parameter for a function; you just
--  use a type variable (that must start with a lowercase letter) and the function will be 
--  made generic


def printDict
  : Map(string, α) -> ()
  = { values ->
    values \iter(println) 
  }

--  Return values are target-typed, meaning that, although it's not possible to explicitly provide type arguments,
--  by using a type assertion on the result you can specify the type of the result. E.g.

def fromJson: string -> α = { json -> ... }

def p: Person = fromJson("...")


--  -- Type narrowing --

-- 	Nullable / optional types
--	There is no concept of `null` in nyx. If you want to represent a value that may be missing use
--  a tag union. Note there is no built-in `Option` type, as it is almost always more meaningful to
--  use an explicitly-named `None` case
def stringLength: (#some(int); #notFound) = #notFound

--  It is a strongly-recommended practice to use the tag `Some` to represent the "success" case, as
--  the type becomes compatible with the `Option` and `Result` functions in the standard library


--	You can't use an optional string as if it were a string. E.g. This is not allowed:
def input: string? = ""
def stringLength = input.length

--	If you want to access properties on the string object you must either:
--	1. Use a match expression
def stringLength =
  match input
    | #nil       ->  0
    | s: string  ->  s.length 	--  Note that the compiler can infer that s is a string in this case, since all other 
                            --  cases have been exhausted by this point

--  Note also that there are active patterns in the standard library to help match on option types:
def inputLength = 
  match input
    | some s -> s.length
    | #nil    -> 0

--	3. Use the standard library's bang operator "!". This will cause a runntime error to be thrown if the value is 'nothing'
def stringLength = input!.length
print(input!)

--	Note that the postfix bang operator "!" is actually compiler shorthand for .force()
--	The above example could also be written as
input.force() \println

--	4. Use the map operator "*.". This means that if the value is null the entire expression will
--	not be evaluated, and null will be returned. Note that in this example the type of stringLength is not
--	`int`, but `int?`
def stringLength = input?.length

-- 	Note that the "?" operator is compiler shorthand for a call to the `.map` function, if it exists.
--	The above example could also be written as ->
def stringLength = input \map { length }

--	Optional parameters
--	Nullable types work together with optional parameters. In the following examples the external signature
--	shows that the type of startIndex is `int?`, and the compiler will allow the function to be called without
--	supplying that parameter. However, inside the function the type of startIndex appears to be `int`
def slice(list, startIndex = 1) ->
    list.slice startIndex


--  Comparison operators can be used as patterns. For example:

def f = { x -> match x
    | < 0 -> "negative"
    | > 0 -> "positive"
    | _   -> "zero"
  }




type UserId = UserId int
type User = (id: UserId, firstName: string, surname: string)

type UserRepository = (get: UserId -> User)

def userRepository = UserRepository (
  get = { this, userId ->
      User(id = userId, firstName = "Bob", surname = "Jones")
  }
)


--  -- Abstractions --

    Traits are supported.
    where a type is an abstraction over objects, a trait is an abstraction over types.
    
    The Number trait (with the alias `number`) is defined in the standard library as such ->

type Number(t) = (
    `+`: (t, t) -> t 
    `-`: (t, t) -> t 
    `/`: (t, t) -> t 
    `*`: (t, t) -> t 
    `1`: t
    `0`: t
)

--	Number essentially forms a type constraint. Int and float both conform and are therefore considered numbers

--  Abstracting away property names

--  The ~name syntax allows you to parameterize a type with the name of a property(s), in a way that different
--  implementations appear as different types. This is useful for implementing typeclasses such as Monoid, where
--  multiple implementations of the same typeclass are possible for the same type, but with different properties.
type Monoid(a, ~combine, ~neutral) = (
    ~neutral: a
    ~combine: (a, a) -> α
)

--  For example, for the type `int` there are multiple possible monoids, such as one for addition and one for 
--  multiplication. The fact that the `Monoid` type is parameterized by the name of the property means that
--  this is possible. Note that the backticks allow identifiers that would normally not be legal.
default Monoid(int, `+`, `0`) = (
    def `0` = 0
    def `+`(x, y) -> x + y
)

def sum 
  : [Monoid(a, `+`, `0`)] series(α) -> α
  = { xs -> xs.fold(`0`, `+`) }

def product
  : [Monoid(a, `*`, `1`)] series(α) -> α
  = { xs -> xs.fold(`1`, `*`) }

--  Any `default` implementation that is in scope is automatically added to the context, so it doesn't need to 
--  be explicitly passed in:

type Point = (x: int, y: int)

default Monoid(Point, `+`, `0`) = (
    def `0` = Point(0, 0)
    def `+`(a, b) -> Point(a.x + b.x, a.y + b.y)
)

def sumPoints = Point[(1, 2)
                      (3, 4)].sum --  Note that the default implementation of Monoid(Point, `+`, `0`) is automatically supplied


--	Enables the Seq.sum function to be defined as ->

module Seq ->
    def sum =
      : [Summable(α)] seq(α) -> α
      { xs -> Seq.fold(xs, (+), zero) } -- `+` and `zero` come from `Summable(α)`

--  If there is a default implementation of Summable for your type, and it is in scope at the callsite, then you can
--  simply call this function and the implementation of Summable will be automatically supplied:

module Impl =
    default Summable(int) = (
        `+` = { x, y -> x + y }
        `0` = 0
    )

import Impls

def sum = [1, 2, 3] \Seq.sum --  The implementation of Summable(int) from default is automatically supplied

--  If an default cannot be automatically supplied, then you can supply it explicitly:
def sum2 = [1, 2, 3] \Seq.sum[Impls.Summable(int)] --  The implementation of Summable(int) from default is explicitly supplied

--	An important concept in Nanyx is that of a type with a default value. This allows the keyword `default` to be used
type Default(α) = (default: α)

--   This means that the reduce function on sequences does not need a seed value; the type itself can provide one

rec reduce
  : [Default(α)] list(α), (α, α -> α) -> α
  = { xs, f ->
    match xs
      | [] -> default
      | [head, ...tail] -> f(head, reduce(tail, f))
  }


