Nyx
===

Nyx's goals are as follows:

# To be at least reasonably familiar to a user of popular languages such as Python or TypeScript, even if some things are a little different

# To have minimal syntax, with a focus on readability

# To be strongly-typed, but with type inference so that the user doesn't have to write types all the time

# To be gradually-typed, meaning that a Nyx program will still run even if it has type errors

# To be as powerful as possible with as few features as possible

# To be as consistent as possible, i.e. no special cases or exceptions

We can see this in how Nyx handles errors. If a user wishes to return an error from a function they simply return an error value. Thanks to the fact that Nyx supports union types we know that the function's caller must handle this value (or return it themselves).

# To be as productive as possible

This means a focus on the developer experience, with high-quality editor support, good error messages, and a fast compiler.


--  It's also possible to create a typed definition that is not a function, but a value.
--  This is equivalent to an `object` definition from Scala or Kotlin
def Config = ( 
  host = "https://nyx-lang.org"
  port = 80
)

--  If the above was written as `def config` then it would have the type `(host: string, port: int)`
--  but, thanks to the uppercase starting character, it also generates a type `Config` with the same
--  so that `def Config` has the type `Config`.




--  Existential types
type DataFlow = (
  type LocalState
  next: LocalState -> ()
  getCurrentDataFlowDiagnostics: list(string)
)

type Collection = (
  type Item
  mut count: int
  apply: (index: Int) -> Item
  append: (item: Item) -> ()
)

def UppercaseStringsCollection() ->
  def container = MList(): _(string)

  ( type Item = string
    mut count = 0
    def apply(index) -> container(index)
    def append(item) -> container.append(item.toUpperCase())
  )

def myDataFlow = 
  mut state = 0

  DataFlow(
    type LocalState = int
    def next() -> state += 1
    def getCurrentDataFlowDiagnostics() -> ["State is {state}"]
  )


--  --	Generics -- 

--	What happens if there are no type annotations and the compiler doesn't have any uses with which
--	to guess the type? E.g.
def f(x) -> x

--	This function takes in an object and then just returns it. What type is `a`? Any? No. If the compiler
--	can't infer the type of the argument it will try to make your function generic.
--	So, rewriting the above function in full ->
spec a -> a
def f(x) -> x		--	This way the function is still strongly-typed but will work on any type

--  Note that there isn't a syntax for introducing a type parameter for a function; you just use a type variable (that
--  must start with a lower| letter) and the function will be made generic


spec Map(string, a) -> ()
def printDict(values) ->
  values -iter(println)

--  Return values are target-typed, meaning that, although it's not possible to explicitly provide type arguments,
--  by using a type assertion on the result you can specify the type of the result. E.g.

spec string -> a
def fromJson(json) -> ...

def p: Person = fromJson("...")


--  -- Type narrowing --

-- 	Nullable / optional types
--	There is no concept of `null` in nyx. If you want to represent a value that may be missing you
--	must wrap the type in something like the option union
def stringLength: Option(int) = #nil

--	Option is a type alias, and is defined as follows ->
type Option(t) = (#some, t) | #nil

--	The type is generic, meaning that `t` can be any type. `Option` is equal to `t | ()`, meaning that any member of
--	Note that the option type has a special shorthand syntax supported by the compiler. You can instead write ->
def stringLength: int? = #nil

--	You can't use an optional string as if it were a string. E.g. This is not allowed ->
def input: string? = ""
def stringLength = input.length

--	If you want to access properties on the string object you must either ->
--	1. Use a match expression
def stringLength =
  match input
    | #nil       ->  0
    | s: string  ->  s.length 	--  Note that the compiler can infer that s is a string in this case, since all other 
                            --  cases have been exhausted by this point

--  Note also that there are active patterns in the standard library to help match on option types:
def inputLength = 
  match input
    | some s -> s.length
    | #nil    -> 0

--	3. Use the standard library's bang operator "!". This will cause a runntime error to be thrown if the value is 'nothing'
def stringLength = input!.length
print(input!)

--	Note that the postfix bang operator "!" is actually compiler shorthand for .force()
--	The above example could also be written as
input.force() -println

--	4. Use the map operator "*.". This means that if the value is null the entire expression will
--	not be evaluated, and null will be returned. Note that in this example the type of stringLength is not
--	`int`, but `int?`
def stringLength = input?.length

-- 	Note that the "?" operator is compiler shorthand for a call to the `.map` function, if it exists.
--	The above example could also be written as ->
def stringLength = input -map { length }

--	Optional parameters
--	Nullable types work together with optional parameters. In the following examples the external signature
--	shows that the type of startIndex is `int?`, and the compiler will allow the function to be called without
--	supplying that parameter. However, inside the function the type of startIndex appears to be `int`
def slice(list, startIndex = 1) ->
    list.slice startIndex


--  Comparison operators can be used as patterns. For example:

spec int -> string
def f(x) = match x
  | < 0 -> "negative"
  | > 0 -> "positive"
  | _   -> "zero"





type UserId = UserId int
type User = (id: UserId, firstName: string, surname: string)

type UserRepository = (get: UserId -> User)

def userRepository = UserRepository (
  def get(this, userId) ->
      User(id = userId, firstName = "Bob", surname = "Jones")
)


--  -- Abstractions --

    Traits are supported.
    where a type is an abstraction over objects, a trait is an abstraction over types.
    
    The Number trait (with the alias `number`) is defined in the standard library as such ->

type Number(t) = (
    `+`: (t, t) -> t 
    `-`: (t, t) -> t 
    `/`: (t, t) -> t 
    `*`: (t, t) -> t 
    `1`: t
    `0`: t
)

--	Number essentially forms a type constraint. Int and float both conform and are therefore considered numbers

--  Abstracting away property names

--  The ~name syntax allows you to parameterize a type with the name of a property(s), in a way that different
--  implementations appear as different types. This is useful for implementing typeclasses such as Monoid, where
--  multiple implementations of the same typeclass are possible for the same type, but with different properties.
type Monoid(a, ~combine, ~neutral) = (
    ~neutral: a
    ~combine: (a, a) -> a
)

--  For example, for the type `int` there are multiple possible monoids, such as one for addition and one for 
--  multiplication. The fact that the `Monoid` type is parameterized by the name of the property means that
--  this is possible. Note that the backticks allow identifiers that would normally not be legal.
default Monoid(int, `+`, `0`) = (
    def `0` = 0
    def `+`(x, y) -> x + y
)

spec [Monoid(a, `+`, `0`)] series(a) -> a
def sum(xs) = xs.fold(`0`, `+`)

spec [Monoid(a, `*`, `1`)] series(a) -> a
def product(xs) -> xs.fold(`1`, `*`)

--  Any `default` implementation that is in scope is automatically added to the context, so it doesn't need to 
--  be explicitly passed in:

type Point = (x: int, y: int)

default Monoid(Point, `+`, `0`) = (
    def `0` = Point(0, 0)
    def `+`(a, b) -> Point(a.x + b.x, a.y + b.y)
)

def sumPoints = Point[(1, 2)
                      (3, 4)].sum --  Note that the default implementation of Monoid(Point, `+`, `0`) is automatically supplied


--	Enables the Seq.sum function to be defined as ->

module Seq ->
    spec [Summable(a)] seq(a) -> a
    def sum(xs) = Seq.fold(xs, (+), zero) -- `+` and `zero` come from `Summable(a)`

--  If there is a default implementation of Summable for your type, and it is in scope at the callsite, then you can
--  simply call this function and the implementation of Summable will be automatically supplied:

module Impl ->
    default Summable(int) = (
        def `+`(x, y) -> x + y
        def zero = 0
    )

import Impls

def sum = [1, 2, 3] -Seq.sum --  The implementation of Summable(int) from default is automatically supplied

--  If an default cannot be automatically supplied, then you can supply it explicitly:
def sum2 = [1, 2, 3] -Seq.sum[Impls.Summable(int)] --  The implementation of Summable(int) from default is explicitly supplied

--	An important concept in Nyx is that of a type with a default value. This allows the keyword `default` to be used
type Default(a) = (default: a)

--   This means that the reduce function on sequences does not need a seed value; the type itself can provide one

spec [Default(a)] (list(a), (a, a) -> a) -> a
rec reduce(xs, f) ->
    match xs
      | [] -> default
      | [head, ...tail] -> f(head, reduce(tail, f))



